---
author: denten
layout: post
slug: asocial text
title: Asocial Text
categories:
- think.stack
---

Writing is a fundamentally social activity. Even when you do it alone, in a
locked room, wearing your new noise-canceling headphones, you are (hopefully)
writing for someone. A private language, says Dr. Wittgenstein, is an
impossibility. Reading is a social activity too, because at the very least, it
is an encounter of two minds. But usually, there are many more minds involved:
other texts, other writers, co-authors, co-readers, book clubs, literature
professors, snooty bookstore employees, publishers, and book critics.

Yet, these are quiet social encounters. They require a measure of focus,
solitude, and introspection. It would be a mistake then to envision the future
of the book simply in terms of social media. Part of what makes a book a book
is its ability to block a part of the present physical world in favor of
atemporal virtual reality. The book literally blocks vision. It privileges
mental constructs over immediate input of the senses. To be lost in a book is
to project ones sense of being into another world.

Lets imagine then a better book, one that further protects the sanctity of
mental life, at least for the duration of reading. Imagine a book which, when
opened, literally surrounds its reader in a protective cocoon. Imagine a book
that can balance the readers dopamine levels. Imagine a wearable winter coat
book, a pillow and blanket book, an umbrella book, a climate-controlled book
built like a house or a nuclear fallout shelter or a biodome.

Paper, as it turns out, is a pretty durable materialâ€”much more durable than,
lets say, silicon chips or copper circuit boards. It can also be used for
insulation, it bends and burns better, and can make for versatile construction
material (for the folding of paper planes, for example). I say this without
irony and without fetishism or nostalgia. Whatever technology comes beyond the
book, it should at the very least do all those things better than cloth and
paper.

Published in [*Sprint Beyond the Book*][1], Arizona State University (2014).

[1]: http://web.archive.org/web/20140815081850/http://sprintbeyondthebook.com/copyright/ 
