---
author: denten
layout: post
slug: bad-links
title: Bad Links
categories:
- think.stack
---

It is my intention here to convince you that links are bad. They are bad when
it comes to writing for the web in general, bad for books, bad for long-form
journalism, and even worse in academic publication. It is not that I am
against the idea of links. As we will see here, the problem lies in the way
links are used. That is also to say that we can do something about using links
better. But first, why are links so bad?

To start with, links are opaque. The worst of lot are links like [this][2] and
[this][3]. Of the two thises, the first leads us to Google and the second to
Bing.  But your readers would not know that just by looking at the text. The
best they can do is hover over the word with their mouse cursor, relying on
the browser interface to show them where the link is going. And once they get
there, there are no easy ways to get back. The writer must have faith in the
browser to do the right thing in guiding the reader through an intertextual
maze. And that is not right when it comes to writing. In most situations, the
author should architect that experience explicitly. If you think about it, the
old-fashioned apparatus of quoting an external text is itself a type of
linking. But rather than quoting the whole text, the author only quotes the
relevant bits. Sending readers away to do that work on their own is lazy and
irresponsible. Imagine a tour guide who tells his tourists to just go over
there and look at some stuff, and come back when you're done. Links can be
that disorienting.

[2]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141005021655/http://www.google.com/
[3]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141005021655/http://www.bing.com/

Links disrupt the reading experience, and that is the second reason for why
links are bad. It is possible that you want the readers experience to be
disrupted. But in many cases you don't. And the reader is already distracted
by the proliferation of parallel windows and devices that augment their
reading in some way. Do we need to make that distraction easier? Should I link
the [Wikipedia article][4] on media multitasking or is it enough for my purposes to
simply mention Wikipedia, or to trust my reader to look something up later, in
a reference source of their own choosing? Or better yet, should I help the
reader along by summarizing the findings? It mentions that most folks already
read with a second screen in tow. It is not that unusual to see someone look
something up on their phone or tablet while reading a newspaper or an e-book.
Why? Because they don't want to leave the flow of the first screen. There is
great pleasure in immersive, uninterrupted reading.

[4]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141005021655/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_multitasking

Besides being disruptive, links are ugly. They are ugly together, as in when
[many][5] [links][6] con[spire][7] to m[ake a tang][8]led [mess.][9] And they
are also ugly when naked on their own, like this:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Jw2akGstb5wIJe0R3PFuTOYJfIThY74fXcMga5r7QAg/edit?.
That string of characters is clearly not meant for human consumption. The
question mark and the period at the end kill me entirely. Meaningless
punctuation traffic inside of links coupled with regular punctuation ruins the
sentence and the paragraph.  Of course, I could just tell you to read
something on [Google Docs][10]. That looks much better, but then we are making
the opaqueness problem worse by hiding the address behind words that may or
may not be related to the destination. It seems that we are stuck compromising
on either transparency, reading flow, or visual impact.

[5]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141005021655/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plural
[6]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141005021655/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperlink
[7]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141022082657/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spire
[8]: https://www.google.com/search?q=make+a+tang
[9]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141014084805/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaghetti
[10]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Jw2akGstb5wIJe0R3PFuTOYJfIThY74fXcMga5r7QAg/edit?usp=sharing

Links aren't very secure to begin with, but hiding links behind words further
compromises security. You've probably heard of link-baiting: the purposefully
malicious attempts to trick a reader into revealing personal information when
following a link that masquerades as a legitimate destination. You can visit
[my site][11] to learn more about link-baiting. You shouldn't have clicked
that!  (Don't worry, that was a real (archived) Google login page.) But even
if one means well, viruses and browser exploits can inject bad links into your
otherwise legitimate ones. A common technique is to install a browser script
along with some seemingly useful search bar that will redirect all legitimate
links to a site that makes money by advertising. Worse yet, you could end up
on a site that attempts to further compromise your computer. Links are not
secure because in linking, we outsource the relationship between reader and
content to the browser.

[11]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141005021655/https://accounts.google.com/ServiceLogin?hl=en&continue=https://www.google.com/

Links are opaque, disruptive, ugly, unsafe, and they rot. Links don't last
because the content at the address is dynamic. It is not guaranteed to be
there decades, months, minutes after your initial visit. In that case, why
even bother? The link works best for ephemeral output (like a tweet). We must
think of something much more robust for any serious writing that hopes to
survive to the end of the week. And for the really good stuff, the kind of
stuff that is the purview of librarians, we need to cultivate sustainable,
long-lasting, responsible practices of online citation. It should work as
well, if not better, than the familiar bibliographic citation in print. This
practice should combat digital decay, not aid it. We need to think about the
ways our links can be accessed, mined, and preserved with the archive-grade
zeal of the rare book librarian.

Finally, links are terrible for accessibility. It is bad enough that clicking
on [a][12] small word is difficult for people with any sort of fine-motor
control problems. Being a little older in itself can make the online reading
experience painful. Things are much worse for those with Parkinsons or for the
blind. Sina Bahram, a blind usability expert (who is himself blind) reports
that some sites contain thousands (!) of links in advance of actual content.
Screen readers for the blind must read each one of them out loud. For the
screen reader, there is no difference between garbage links and useful
content. If you thought looking at links is disruptive, imagine listening to a
robotic voice that pronounces every slash and every useless number in:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=92pM6hJG6Wo. And that is why Sina Bahram
listens to his reader at 950 words per minute.

[12]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141005021655/http://www.pointerpointer.com/

Any one of these issues alone should give us pause. Together, they are a cause
of grave concern. How did we get here? And what can we do to make links good
again?

How did we get here is not an easy question. A part of the story is surely the
excitement we once felt about hypertext. Links were supposed to break the
hegemony of linear narrative, ushering in a new interconnected world. To some
extent the dream came true. But links also brought with them such things as
Search Engine Optimization (SEO). Googles PageRank algorithm tracks, among
other things, the number of incoming and outgoing links. This bias for
connectivity encourages link farms: sites that attempt to game the system by
aggregating links or cross-linking their own content. A sure sign of a vacuous
SEO-driven piece of writing is a certain cynical and strategic use of links to
other popular sources. How long until the SEO logic infects poetry, fiction,
or investigative journalism?

What can we do to make links better? There are a few things we all can do now.
First, lets use links sparingly. Think smartly about whether you need to link
or whether you can make do with a good, old-fashioned quote or citation.
Don't link just because you can. Second, link explicitly: [youtube.com] is
better than [this][14]. Third, realize that online content is dynamic. It
makes no sense to link a dynamic resource when the intent is to create a link
to a static version of a document. Tools like the Save Page Now service,
hosted by the Internet Archive, do just that. You can find this essay at
http://denten.plaintext.in/think.stack/bad-links but its earlier draft is
best captured in a snapshot here:
http://web.archive.org/web/20140208220625/http://sprintbeyondthebook.com/2014/02/bad-links/.

Finally, do not neglect the humble footnote. Footnotes provide a nice blend
between concision, transparency, and good knowledge design.<sup>1</sup>

[13]: http://www.youtube.com/
[14]: http://www.youtube.com/

<sup>1</sup> Published in *Sprint Beyond the Book*, Arizona State University
(2014). Archived in February, 2014.
[http://web.archive.org/web/20141005021655/http://sprintbeyondthebook.com/2014/02/bad-links/][1].

[1]: http://web.archive.org/web/20141005021655/http://sprintbeyondthebook.com/2014/02/bad-links/ 
