---
author: denten
comments: false
layout: post
published: true
slug: free-library-congress
title: Preliminary Thoughts on the Way to the Free Library Congress
categories:
- think.stack
---

<!--

Edited: Rosemary Grennan, MayDay Rooms (London, UK) 

--> 

To appear in [Schloss---Post](http://schloss-post.com/).

![](/assets/star.jpg)

I am on my way to the Free Library Congress at Schloss Solitude, in Stuttgart.
The event is not really called the free library congress, but that is what I
imagine it to be. It will be a meeting about the growing conflict between
those who assert their intellectual property rights and those who assert their
right to access information freely.

Working at a North American university, it is easy to forget that most people
in the United States and abroad, lack affordable access to published
information---books, medical research, science, and law. Outside of a
university subscription, reading a single academic article may cost upwards of
several hundred dollars. The pricing structure precludes any meaningful idea
of independent research. Without an institutional subscription it becomes
impossible to perform literature reviews or to cite something briefly.

Imagine yourself a physician or a young scientist somewhere in the global
south, or in Eastern Europe, or anywhere really without a good library and
without the means to pay exorbitant subscription prices demanded by the
distributors. How will you keep current in your field? How are you to do right
by your patients in following the latest treatment protocols? What about
citizen science or simply due diligence on the part of patients, litigants, or
primary school students in search for reputable sources? Wherever library
budgets do not soar into the millions, research involves building archives
that exist outside of the intellectual property regime. It involves the
organizational effort required to collect, sort, and share information widely.

A number of prominent sites and communities emerged in the past decade in an
attempt to address the global imbalance of access to information. Among them,
Sci-Hub.[^sci] Founded by Alexandra Elbakyan, a young neuroscientist from
Kazakhstan, the site makes close to 50 million scientific available for
download. Elbakyan describes the mission of her library as "removing all
barriers that impede the widest possible distribution of knowledge in human
society." Compare this with Google's mission "to organize the world's
information and make it universally accessible and useful."[^google] The two
visions are not so different. Sci Hub violates intellectual property law in
many jurisdictions, including the United States. Elsevier, one of the world's
largest scientific publishers, has filed a complaint against Sci Hub in New
York Southern District Court.[^court] Of course Google also continually finds
itself at odds with intellectual property holders. The very logic of
collecting and organizing human knowledge is fundamentally a public works
project at odds with the idea of private intellectual property.

Addressing the judge directly in her defense, Elbakyan appeals to universal
ethical principles, like those enshrined in Article 27 of the United Nations
Declaration of Human Rights, which holds that: "Everyone has the right to
freely participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts
and to share in scientific advancement and its
benefits."[^rights]<sup>,</sup>[^27] Her language---our language---evokes also
the "unquiet" history of the public library.[^battles] I call this small,
scrappy group of artists, academics, librarians, and technologists "free" to
evoke the history of "free and public" libraries and to appeal also to the
intellectual legacy of the free software movement: as Richard Stallman
famously put it "free as in free speech not as in free beer."[^stallman]

The word "piracy" is also often used to describe the online free library
world. For some it carries an unwelcome connotation. In most cases, the
maintenance of large online archives is a drain on resources, not
profiteering. It resembles much more the work of a librarian than that of a
corsair. Nevertheless, many in the community actually embrace a few of the
political implications that come with the idea of piracy. Piracy, in that
sense, is related to the methods and intuitions behind the occupy movement.
When public resources are unjustly appropriated and when such appropriation is
subsequently defended through the use of law and force, the only available
response is counter occupation.

The agenda notes introducing the event calls for a "solidarity platform" in
support of free and open public libraries like Sci Hub and Library Genesis,
which increasingly find themselves in legal peril. I do not yet know what the
organizers have in mind, but my own thoughts in preparation for the day's
activities evolve around the following few premises:

1. The case for universal and free access to knowledge is stronger when it is
made on ethical, technological, and **tactical** grounds, not just legal.

    The cost of sharing and reproduction in the digital world are too low to
sustain practices and institutions built on the assumptions of print. The
attempt to re-introduce "stickiness" to electronic documents artificially
through digital rights management technology and associated legislation like
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act are doomed to fail. Information does not
(and cannot) "want" to be free,[^doctorow] but it definitely lost some of its
purchase on the medium when words moved from vellum to magnetic charge and
subsequently to solid storage medium that---I kid you not---works through
things like quantum tunneling and electron avalanche injection.

2. Any proposed action it will require the close **alignment of interests**
between authors, publishers, readers, and libraries.

    For our institutions to catch up to the changing material conditions *and* our
(hopefully not so rapidly changing) sense of what's right and wrong in the
world, writers, readers, publishers, and archives need to coordinate their
action. We are a community. And I think we want more or less the same thing:
to reach an audience, to find and share information, and to remain a vital
intellectual force. The real battle for the hearts and minds of an informed
public lays elsewhere. Much larger forces of capital and centralization
threaten the very existence of a public commons. To survive, we need to
nurture a conversation across institutional boundaries.

    By my calculations, Library Genesis, one of the most influential free
online book libraries sustains itself on a budget of several thousand dollars
per year.[^budget] The maintenance of Sci Hub requires a bit more.[^budget2]
How do pirate libraries achieve so much with so little? The fact that these
libraries do not pay exorbitant licence fees can only be a small part of the
answer. The larger part of the answer includes their ability to rely on the
good will and on the support of the community. Why can't readers and writers
contribute to the development of infrastructures of their home schools and
universities? Why are libraries so reliant on outside vendors, who take most
of the profits out of our ecosystem?

    I am conflicted about leaving booksellers out of the equation. In response
about my question about booksellers---do they help or hinder project of
universal access?---Marcell Mars spoke about "a nostalgia for capitalism we
used to know." Tomislav Medak spoke in defense of small book publishers that
produce beautiful objects. But the largest of booksellers are no longer
strictly in the business of selling books. They build cloud infrastructures,
they sell online services to the military, build autonomous drones, and much
much more. The project of corporate growth just may be incompatible with the
project to provide free and universal access to information.

3. Libraries and publishing conclude a **long chain of literary production**.
Whatever ails the free library must be also addressed at the source of
authorship.

    Much of the world's knowledge is locked behind paywalls. Such closed
systems at the point of distribution reflect labor practices that also rely on
closed and proprietary tools. Inequities of access mirror inequities of
production. Techniques of writing are furthermore impoverished when writers
are not free to modify their instruments. This means that as we support free
libraries we must also convince our peers to write using software that can be
freely modified, hacked, extended. Documents written in that way have a better
chance of ending up in open archives.

4. We need **more empirical evidence** about the impact of media piracy.

   The political and economic response to piracy is often guided by fear and
speculation. The work of researchers like Bodó Balázs is beginning to connect
the business of selling books with the practices of reading them. Balázs makes
a powerful argument, holding that the flourishing of shadow media markets
indicates a failure in legitimate markets. Research suggests that piracy does
not decrease, it increases sales, particularly in places which are not
well-served by traditional publishers and distributors. A more complete,
"thick description" of global media practice requires more research, both
qualitative and quantitative.

5. **Multiplicity is key.**

    As everyone arrives and the conversation begins in earnest, several
participants remark on the notable absences around the table. North America,
Eastern and Western Europe are overrepresented. I remind myself that we travel
in good company---artists, scholars, activists, philosophers---who may not
necessarily think of themselves as supporters of the cause in favor of what
Antonia Majaca has called "epistemic disobedience" (quoting  Walter
Mignolo).[^cause] Femke Snelting and Ted Byfield remind us that whatever is
meant by "universal" access to knowledge must include a multiplicity of
voices---not *the* universal but a tangled network of
universalisms---international, planetary, intergalactic.

[^sci]: [http://sci-hub.io/](http://sci-hub.io/)

[^court]: [https://dockets.justia.com/docket/new-york/nysdce/1:2015cv04282/442951](https://dockets.justia.com/docket/new-york/nysdce/1:2015cv04282/442951)

[^google]: [https://www.google.com/about/company/](https://www.google.com/about/company/)

[^rights]: [https://torrentfreak.com/images/sci-hub-reply.pdf](https://torrentfreak.com/images/sci-hub-reply.pdf)

[^27]: [http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/](http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/)

[^battles]: In reference to Battles, Matthew. *Library: An Unquiet History*. New York: Norton, 2003.

[^stallman]: [http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html)

[^budget]: [http://computationalculture.net/article/book-piracy-as-peer-preservation](http://computationalculture.net/article/book-piracy-as-peer-preservation)

[^budget2]: [https://tarnkappe.info/e-book-piraterie-interview-mit-alexandra-elbakyan-von-sci-hub/](https://tarnkappe.info/e-book-piraterie-interview-mit-alexandra-elbakyan-von-sci-hub/)

[^cause]: [http://custodians.online/](http://custodians.online/)

[^doctorow]: Doctorow, Cory, Neil Gaiman, and Amanda Palmer. *Information
Doesn’t Want to Be Free: Laws for the Internet Age*. San Francisco:
McSweeney’s, 2014.

