---
author: denten
comments: false
layout: post
published: true
title: A Translation of Yuri Olesha's "Liompa" (1928)
snippet: 150
categories:
- think.stack
---

The boy Alexander splintered wood in the kitchen. Golden, delicious peels
covered the cuts on his fingers.

The kitchen opened into a yard. It was spring: doors would not shut, grass
grew by the stoop, spilled water glistened against the rocks. A rat took
refuge in the trash bin. Someone was frying potatoes. A kerosene stove was
lit. The life of the stove began lavishly, in a plume of fire that reached the
ceiling. It died as a tiny blue flame. A neighbor boiled crabs. He would use
two fingers to grab a crab by its waist. The crabs bore a greenish tinge
reminiscent of the plumbing. Suddenly, a few drops of water escaped the
faucet. The faucet snorted. Its pipes started their back and forth in various
voices. At once, dusk took shape. A lone glass tumbler remained on the
windowsill to receive the last rays of the sun through the wicket gate.  The
faucet continued to grumble. A varied crackle and stir commenced around the
stove.

The twilight was splendid. Folks ate sunflowers; someone sang. A domestic,
yellow light fell onto the sidewalk. A food stand was illuminated brightly.

A critically ill man by the name of Ponomarev lay alone in the room next to
the kitchen. A candle burned. A flagon of medicine marked by a doctor's script
stood above his head. When friends visited, Ponomarev would say:

"Congratulate me, I am dying."

A delirium took him in the evening. The doctor's script stretched like a
ribbon. The medicine flask stared. It became a royal bride named
*Onomastica*.[^2] The patient was hallucinating. He wanted to write a
scholarly treatise. He conversed with his blanket.

"Are you not ashamed?" he chastised it in a whisper.

The blanket sat beside, lay down beside him, left on occasion, and returned
with news.

He was surrounded by a few things: his medicine, a spoon, light, wallpaper.
Other things left him. When he understood that he was critically ill and that
he was dying, he also understood how great and varied was the world of things
and how little of them have remained under his control. With every day their
numbers diminished. A near thing like a rail ticket was now irreversibly
distant. At first, the number of things diminished at the periphery, far way
from him. Then, the diminishing approached, at a rapidly increasing pace,
toward the center, to him, toward the heart---into the yard, house, hallway,
and into his room.

Initially, the disappearance of things did not cause him much distress.

Whole continents of possibility disappeared as a matter of old age: the
Americas, the possibility of being rich or good looking, the prospect of a
family (he was single). The real pain came when he saw that even those objects
that followed regularly beside him were receding. And so one day, the street,
the concept of work, post office, and horses, all left. The vanishing
accelerated nearby, close at hand. The corridor was already out of reach and
in his very room, before his eyes, his overcoat, door latch, and shoes slipped
from his grasp. He knew that on the way to him, death was destroying things.
From a world of their vast and easy quantity she left him only a few and those
that if it were up to him, he would never let into his household. He received
a bedpan. He received the terrible visits and looks from his friends. He was
powerless to resist these unsolicited and unwanted (as he always thought)
possessions. They were singular and indispensable now. He lost the right to
select his things.

The boy Alexander was tinkering with a model airplane.

The boy was more complicated and more serious than others thought of him. He
cut his fingers, bled, littered his wood chips, left glue streaks, begged for
silk,[^1] cried, and got whacked upside the head. The adults acknowledged
themselves as absolutely right. Meanwhile, the boy's actions were completely
mature. More than that, he acted as few adults can: in complete agreement with
science. His model was built according to blueprint. Calculations were made.
The boy understood the underlying principles. He could object to the
harassment of his elders with rational explanations and with experimental
results, but he remained silent, because he did not feel justified in
appearing more serious than them.

Around the boy were arranged bands of rubber, wire, wood planks, silk, airy
wisps of silk fabric, and the smell of glue. The sky sparkled. Insects walked
on stone. Inside of a stone on could see a hardened shell.

The boy at work would be approached by another boy: tiny and mostly naked
except for his blue elastics. He touched stuff and was in the way. Alexander
ousted him regularly. The naked rubber boy roamed the house and the corridor
where a bicycle stood, resting a pedal to one side of the wall. (The pedal
left a scrape on the wallpaper. It was as if the bicycle held on to the wall
by that scrape.)

The little boy would come to visit the sick man. His head bobbed up and down
at the broadsides of the bed. Ponomarev's temples were pale, like a blind
man's. The boy would approach bluntly and examine them. He thought nothing of
it. The world was always so: bearded men were supposed to lie on beds in
rooms. The boy only just entered the understanding of things. He could not yet
distinguish the differences in their duration.

He turned and began to march around the room. He saw floor tiles, dust under
the baseboards, cracks in the wall plaster. Lines converged and diverged
around him. Bodies came to life. A focal point of light appeared suddenly. The
boy rushed towards it, but no sooner that he took a step, the shape dissolved
due to a change in the perspective. The boy looked for it---up and down,
behind the furnace. He searched and finally gave up, perplexed, shrugging his
shoulders. Every moment created a new entity. Wondrous was the spider. It
flittered away at a mere thought of a touch.

For the dying man, things that departed left only their names.

There was an apple in the world. It shone in the foliage, rotated slightly,
seized, and spun with it a few shreds of the day, the blueness of the garden,
the window transom. The law of gravity awaited it under the tree, on black
soil, among the knolls. Beaded ants scurried among the knolls. Newton sat in
the garden. Inside the apple were concealed a multitude of causes capable of
producing many more effects. But not one of those effects were meant for
Ponomarev. The apple became for him an abstraction. And the fact that matter
escaped him while the abstraction remained, was painful.

"I thought the external world does not exist," he pondered. "I thought it was
my eye and my ear that ruled objects and I thought the world would cease to
exist when I cease. Now I see that everything is turning away from me, even
while I am still alive. But I exist still! Why then do these objects
disappear? I thought it was my brain that gave them form, weight, and color.
They still left me, and only their names---useless, abandoned names---swarm
around my brain. And what am I to do with these names?"

Ponomarev looked wistfully at the child. This one walked. Things rushed toward
him. Not knowing one name, he smiled at them. A lush wake of things broke
behind him when he would leave.

"Listen," the sick man called to the child. "Listen... You. know that all this
will be gone when I die, neither yard, nor tree, nor daddy, nor mommy. I will
take them all with me."

A rat got into the kitchen.

The man listened as to its chores as it clanked the dishes, opened the faucet,
rustled in the bucket.

"Washing the dishes, eh?" he thought.

At once a restless thought came to him: What if the rat possessed a proper
name, unbeknownst to people? He began to imagine such a name. He was
delirious. The more he thought about it the more afraid he became. He
understood that he must stop thinking about the rat's name by all means and
yet he continued, knowing that, at the very moment this meaningless and
horrifying name would appear to him, he would die.

"Liompa!," he suddenly screamed in a terrible voice. The house slept. It was
early morning, a few minutes past six. The boy Alexander did not sleep. The
kitchen door was left open into the yard. The sun was still somewhere beneath.
The dying man walked through the kitchen, bent at the waist, his outstretched
hands weighed heavy by his limp wrists. He came to take his things. The boy
Alexander ran through the yard. A model airplane flew ahead. It was the last
thing Ponomarev saw. He did not take it. It flew away. Later on in the day a
casket appeared in the kitchen. It was blue with yellow decorations. The
rubber toddler watched from the corridor, his hands folded behind his back.
The casket was tediously manipulated to get it through the door. A shelf was
hit, a pot; bits of plaster fell. The boy Alexander climbed on top of the
stove and helped by holding the box from beneath. When the casket came
through, finally, into the corridor, turning black at once there, the rubber
toddler pitter-pattered ahead.

G
- Дедушка! Дедушками - закричал он, - тебе гроб принесли.

## Лиомпа

Мальчик Александр строгал на кухне планки. Порезы на пальцах у него
покрывались золотистыми съедобными корками.

Кухня выходила во двор; была весна, двери не закрывались, у порога росла
трава, блестела пролитая на камень вода. В сорном ящике появлялась крыса. В
кухне жарили мелко нарезанную картошку. Зажигали примус. Жизнь примуса
начиналась пышно: факелом до потолка. Умирал он кротким синим огоньком. В
кипятке прыгали яйца. Один жилец варил раков. Живого рака брал он двумя
пальцами за талию. Раки были зеленоватого, водопроводного цвета. Из крана
вылетали вдруг сами по себе две-три капельки. Кран тихо сморкался. Потом
наверху заговаривали несколькими голосами трубы. Тогда сразу определялись
сумерки. Один лишь стакан продолжал сиять на подоконнике. Он получал сквозь
калитку последние лучи солнца. Кран разговаривал. Вокруг плиты начиналось
разнохарактерное шевеление и потрескивание.

Сумерки были прекрасны. Люди ели подсолнухи, раздавалось пение, комнатный
желтый свет падал на тротуар, ярко озарялась съестная лавка.

В комнате, по соседству с кухней, лежал тяжело больной Пономарев. Он лежал в
комнате один, горела свеча, флакон с лекарством стоял над головой, от флакона
тянулся рецепт, Когда приходили к Пономареву знакомые, он говорил:

- Поздравьте меня, я умираю.

К вечеру у него начинался бред. Флакон смотрел на него. Рецепт тянулся, как
шлейф. Флакон был бракосочетающейся герцогиней, Флакон назывался
"тезоименитство". Больной бредил. Он хотел писать трактат. Он разговаривал с
одеялом.

- Ну, как тебе не стыдно ?.. - шептал он.

Одеяло сидело рядом, ложилось рядом, уходило, сообщало новости.

Больного окружали немногие вещи: лекарство, ложка, свет, обои. Остальные вещи
ушли. Когда он понял, что тяжело заболел и умирает, то понял он так же, как
велик и разнообразен мир вещей, и как мало их осталось в его власти. С каждым
днем количество вещей уменьшалось. Такая близкая вещь, как железнодорожный
билет, уже стала для него невозвратимо далекой. Сперва количество вещей
уменьшалось по периферии, далеко от него - затем уменьшение стало приближаться
все скорее к центру, к нему, к сердцу - во двор, в дом, в коридор, в комнату.

Сперва исчезновение вещей не вызывало в больном тоски.

Исчезли страны, Америка, возможность быть красивым или богатым, семья (он был
холост)... К исчезновению этих вещей болезнь не имела никакого отношения: они
ускользали по мере того, как он старел, - а настоящая боль пришла тогда, когда
ему стало ясно, что и те вещи, которые постоянно двигались вровень с ним,
также начинают удаляться от него. Так, в один день покинули его: улица,
служба, почта, лошади. И тут стремительно пошло исчезновение рядом, под боком:
уже ускользнул из власти его коридор, и в самой комнате, на глазах у него
прекратилось значение пальто, дверной задвижки, башмаков, Он знал: смерть по
дороге к нему уничтожает вещи. Из всего огромного и праздного их количества
смерть оставила ему только несколько, и это были те вещи, которых он никогда
бы, если бы это было в его власти, не допустил в свое хозяйство. Он получил
подсов. Он получил страшные посещения и взгляды знакомых. Он понял, что не в
силах защищаться против вторжения этих непрошенных и ненужных, как ему всегда
казалось, вещей. Но теперь они были единственны и непреложны. Он потерял право
выбирать вещи.

Мальчик Александр делал летающую модель.

Мальчик был гораздо сложнее и серьезнее, чем думали о нем остальные. Он резал
пальцы, истекал кровью, сорил стружками, пачкал клеем, выпрашивал шелк,
плакал, получал подзатыльники. Взрослые признавали себя абсолютно правыми. А
между тем, мальчик действовал совершенно по-взрослому, больше того: он
действовал так, как может действовать только некоторое количество взрослых: он
действовал в полном согласии с наукой. Модель строилась по чертежу,
производились вычисления, мальчик знал законы. Он мог бы противопоставить
нападкам взрослых объяснение законов, демонстрацию опытов, но он молчал,
потому что не считал себя вправе показаться более серьезным, чем взрослые.

Вокруг мальчика располагались резиновые жгуты, проволока, планки, шелк, легкая
чайная ткань шелка, запах клея. Сверкало небо. Насекомые ходили по камню. В
камне окаменела ракушка.

К работающему мальчику подходил другой мальчик, совсем маленький, голый, в
синих трусах. Он трогал вещи и мешал. Александр гнал его. Голый резиновый
мальчик ходил по дому, по коридору, где стоял велосипед, (Велосипед педалью
был прислонен к стене. На обоях педаль провела царапину. На этой царапине как
бы и держался велосипед у стены).

Маленький мальчик приходил к Пономареву. Голова малыша маячила над бортом
кровати. У больного виски были бледные, как у слепого. Мальчик подходил
вплотную к голове и рассматривал. Он думал, что в мире всегда было и бывает
так: бородатый человек лежит в комнате на кровати. Мальчик только вступил в
познавание вещей. Он не умел еще различать разницу во времени их
существования.

Он повернулся и стал ходить по комнате. Он видел паркетные плитки, пыль под
плинтусом, трещины на штукатурке. Вокруг него слагались и распределялись
линии, жили тела. Получался вдруг световой фокус, - мальчик спешил к нему, но
едва успевал сделать шаг, как перемена расстояния уничтожала фокус, - и
мальчик оглядывался, смотрел вверх и вниз, смотрел за печку, искал - и
растерянно разводил руками, не находя. Каждая секунда создавала ему новую
вещь. Удивителен был паук. Паук улетел при одной мысли мальчика потрогать
паука рукой.

Уходящие вещи оставляли умирающему только свои имена.

В мире было яблоко. Оно блистало в листве, легонько вращалось, схватывало и
поворачивало с собой куски дня, голубизну сада, переплет окна. Закон
притяжения поджидал его под деревом, на черной земле, на кочках. Бисерные
муравьи бегали среди кочек, В саду сидел Ньютон. В яблоке таилось множество
причин, могущих вызвать еще большее множество следствий. Но ни одна из этих
причин не предназначалась для Пономарева. Яблоко стало для него абстракцией. И
то, что плоть вещи исчезала от него, а абстракция оставалась - было для него
мучительно.

- Я думал, что мира внешнего не существует, - размышлял он, я думал, что глаз
  мой и слух управляют вещами, я думал, что мир перестанет существовать, когда
перестану существовать я. Но вот... я вижу, как все отворачивается от еще
живого меня. Ведь я еще существую! Почему же вещи не существуют? Я думал, что
мозг мой дал им форму, тяжесть и цвет, - но вот они ушли от меня, и только
имена их - бесполезные имена, потерявшие хозяев - роятся в моем мозгу. А что
мне с этих имен?

С тоской смотрел Пономарев на ребенка. Тот ходил. Вещи неслись ему навстречу.
Он улыбался им, не зная ни одного имени. Он уходил, и пышный шлейф вещей бился
за ним.

- Слушай, - позвал ребенка больной, - слушай... Ты. знаешь, когда я умру,
  ничего не останется, Ни двора, ни дерева, ни папы, ни мамы. Я заберу с собой
все.

На кухню проникла крыса.

Пономарев слушал; крыса хозяйничает, стучит тарелками, открывает кран, шуршит
в ведре.

"Эге, она судомойка", - подумал Пономарев.

Тут же в голову пришла ему беспокойная мысль, что крыса может иметь
собственное имя, неизвестное людям. Он начал придумывать такое имя. Он был в
бреду. По мере того как он придумывал, его охватывал все сильнее и сильнее
страх. Он понимал, что во что бы то ни стало надо остановиться и не думать о
том, какое имя у крысы, - вместе с тем продолжал, зная, что в тот самый миг,
когда придумается это единственное бессмысленное и страшное имя, - он умрет.

- Лиомпа! - вдруг закричал он ужасным голосом. Дом спал. Было раннее утро -
  начало шестого. Не спал мальчик Александр. Дверь из кухни была открыта во
двор. Солнце было еще где-то внизу. Умирающий шел по кухне, согнувшись в
животе и вытянув руки с повиснувшими кистями. Он шел забирать вещи. Мальчик
Александр бежал по двору. Модель летела впереди него. Это была последняя вещь,
которую увидел Пономарев. Он не забрал ее. Она улетела. Днем в кухне появился
голубой, с желтыми украшениями гроб. Резиновый мальчик смотрел из коридора,
заложив за спину руки. Пришлось долго и всячески поворачивать гроб, чтобы
пронести в дверь, Задели полку, кастрюлю, посыпалась штукатурка. Мальчик
Александр влез на плиту и помог, поддерживая ящик снизу. Когда гроб проник,
наконец, в коридор, сделавшись сразу черным, резиновый мальчик, шлепая
сандалиями, побежал впереди.

- Дедушка! Дедушками - закричал он, - тебе гроб принесли. 

## Notes:

Olesha's prose is characterized by choppy, hypnotic, often repetitive diction,
lean descriptive lists, and idiosyncratic idiom. The author punctuates short,
almost clinical, sentences with flights of estrangement in which simple things
are described in unfamiliar, jarring ways. A sense of melancholy haunts this
story, conveyed through ambiguous grammatical constructs that waver between
the simple and the habitual past tense. In this way, Olesha purposefully blurs
the lines between "the boy approached" and "the boy would often approach."
Such scenes seem to have happened once and have always been happening
continuously, creating a sense of eternal time which transcends the physical
confines of the narrative. I tried to preserve and prioritize these features
in translation, where possible.

A note on previous translations.

A few select tools are essential for my translation workflow. The first of
these is multitran.ru, a remarkable online meta-aggregation of Russian/English
dictionaries.

- Oxford English Dictionary, expanded online version which includedes
  the full etymological entry.
- Oxford American Writer's Thesaurus
- Garner's Modern American Usage
- Dal's Russian Etymological Dictionary.

More on each as the translation progresses.

Russian copyright has been extended for 70 years retroactively.[^3] The story
entered public domain in 1998 and is therefore reprinted here in full.

Mexico City
June 2017

## Notes

[^1]: The silk is used for the airplane model.

[^2]: The Russian *тезоименитство* is derived from an Old Church Slavonic root and means "namesake day," a holiday distinct from one's birthday celebrated in Christian Orthodox and Catholic traditions. It is not a common word. I chose the similarly uncommon (in English) Greek-derived name for the holiday: *onomastico* in Italian and *ονομαστική γιορτή* in Greek. Names and naming of objects are a major theme in the story.

[^3]: https://web.archive.org/web/20170607090721/http://www.copyright.ru/ru/library/zakonodatelstvo/gk_rf_obschee_zakonodatel/grazhdanskii_kodeks_RF_4_chast/glava_69_obschie_pologeniy/1226-1227_intellektualnie_prava_sobstvennosti/
